---
title: "Socialism or Moralism by Bayard Rustin"
date: 2023-06-01T03:30:51Z
author: "Bayard Rustin"
type: "post"
tags: ["socialism", "politics", "moralism", "united-states", "bayard-rustin",
"organizing"] 
draft: false
---

Cross posted from (Nonsite.org)[https://nonsite.org/socialism-or-moralism/].    

*Passages between brackets are drawn from the manuscript version of the essay and differ slightly from the published variant.*

Published July 7, 1970    

We on the democratic left are living through a real crisis. And precisely
because I believe the Socialist Party has a very vital role to play in this
period, I would like to say something about the problems we confront.   

One aspect is that many people on the [so-called democratic] left today
substitute psychology for politics. Now, I have no objection to a lifestyle, or
how you wear your hair, or whether you eat pig’s feet[, or whether you want to
dress so one cannot distinguish between male and female except upon very close
inspection]. But to substitute this “how I feel, what my thing is,” for
politics, is an extremely dangerous attitude which the Socialist movement must
fight. In fact, the Socialist movement is one of the few movements which has the
credentials for fighting it.    

[The many people today are in fact selling out, and are cop-outs, precisely
because they do not engage in politics. They cannot be made to engage in
politics. And my great fear—and I haven’t been able to make up my mind whether
I’m for the 18-year-old’s voting, because the radicals and the progressives who
are young in fact do not turn out, the conservatives do. And I’m rather
convinced this may be an assist to the right, but I am not certain.]    

The second aspect is that these people substitute morality, and very often
predictions of doom morality, for programs. It is fashionable to assume that the
United States is going fascist, that there are concentration camps up in the
hills, that nothing can work now. This creates a mood of desperation which is
extremely dangerous. In this respect I refer back to the abolitionists, who were
extremely moral people, who were extremely anxious that black people should be
brought out of slavery. But those of them who had nothing but morality,
disappeared into the woodwork once the Emancipation Proclamation was signed, not
to be heard from again. And when black people cried out, “Give us forty acres
and a mule,” they did not assist in that struggle because they were purely
moralists and did not understand its economic dimensions.    

I suspect that many people in this room had better understand that, just as the
abolitionists were a moral movement with no economic and social program, so it
is likely that the last people on whom we can depend, when the war in Vietnam is
over, are the peace people. Like those abolitionists, they will go into the
woodwork, because a movement cannot be sustained which is purely moral, but
which has no political and economic undergirding. And it is for that reason that
I think we need to be prepared. YPSLs [Young People’s Socialist League] should
go into the peace movement, not only to talk about Vietnam, but to say to the
peace movement: “You say that you will be for doing something in this nation
when the war is over. But we are going to have to put up a tremendous struggle
to get that money and you must put into your peace program, now, a social and an
economic program for the ghettoes.”    

Blacks are also sometimes guilty of obsessive moralism. Take the question of
white racism. Simply telling white people that they’re blue-eyed devils or that
they are a racist is dangerous and counterproductive. [I think perhaps the most
dangerous thing that ever happened now, as I look back upon it, is the Kerner
Report.] It becomes a cop-out for blacks who don’t want to develop programs[, so
they call people racists]. And it’s a cop-out for whites who are titillated and
delighted to be abused and called racists. And thus Stokely Carmichael can come
back to the United States and demand (and receive) $2,500 a lecture for telling
white people how they stink.    

The third aspect of this crisis is to substitute slogans for analysis. Thus,
many blacks no longer need to think about an unbearable reality. If a debate
comes up, you simply stop the discussion by calling the person with whom you are
in debate an Uncle Tom. This is exactly what the Ku Klux Klan did in the South,
stopping any debate by the center by the use of a nasty term. Thus, it’s claimed
that only someone who’s under thirty can understand a problem, or someone who
eats soul food. And in like manner, one take out his frustrations as a peace
person by equating hard hats with fascists and brown shirts.   

Now the fact that if anybody simply uses the word “hard hat” to dismiss a whole
mass of people with whom we should be in alliance, he is not thinking. He is
failing to see that it is people in the economic circumstances of the “hard
hats” who are the only people in the United States saving and borrowing to send
their own children to college. The children of the rich can get away without
their parents necessarily having to save for their going to college. These are
the people who are most grievously hit by the economic circumstances that Leon
Keyserling described. These are the people who never had a chance to get an
education and who profoundly want one, and who in their perverse manner show
their profound appreciation of education by being angry at those whom they think
misuse it. [And therefore I say to the young people here, that have got to fight
the business of accepting slogans rather than analysis. Now that is one problem,
and it is going to require plumage on our part, because all too often when one
ought to stand up and speak out against kookism one doesn’t do it. The time has
come when we need to do it.]   

What we must do is analyze the present political situation so that we can know
where our strengths lie. Now, a good example of this point is the NAACP. There
is no organization that can be called a national organization in the black
community except the NAACP. It is the only black organization which organizes
almost a half million dues paying members and which collects almost five million
dollars exclusively from black people. The Urban League does not get its money
from black people; SCLC does not get its money from black people; CORE never got
its money from black people. And yet today, the one organization which is never
discussed is the NAACP. The Panthers do not have one thousand members. Most of
the kids you see on the street are not Panthers. They are there to sell a paper,
for every one they sell they get a dime. There are about one thousand Panther
members in the country, half of whom are FBI men watching the five hundred
legitimate members. And yet, it is these types, and the SDS types, and the
Weathermen types that everybody gives attention to. I say to the YPSLs that
there is one place that you can get the Socialist Party going, and that is
amongst the black middle and working classes, amongst the white working classes
and the rational middle classes. [That’s where you should be.] Forget the
Weathermen, forget SDS, and forget the types of college kids fundamentally who
are white, elitist and who are a happy, charming group of people, who are rich
and who probably are not going to contribute very much either to thinking or
political action. The average family which has children in SDS makes $23,000 a
year, a very sobering thought when you consider that the average American family
makes $8,000 a year. That is the injustice which SDS should be protesting. Now
my friends, we must give attention therefore to those areas where something can
grow, as against where something appears to be dramatic because the press needs
to sell its papers.      

President Nixon’s objective is very clear. It is to destroy that coalition which
Franklin Delano Roosevelt established and upon which every important social
change in this country has depended. He wants to destroy that coalition and
establish one of his own, the same type of alliance which was established in
1876 of Southern conservatives and Northern Republicans. Now his strategy for
doing this is to woo the South, and his tactic is a creation of division and
polarization. Whatever he has done has been calculated to divide black from
white, young from old, hawks from doves, rich from poor, and—in his statement
following the Carswell rejection—to separate North from South. That is his
tactic.    

I maintain that there are two elements in our society which can block Nixon’s
strategy and they are the labor movement and the minorities, particularly the
blacks. I, therefore, say to the young people in the YPSL: You ought to
recognize that economic progress is the basis for maintaining our coalition—that
we are going to win because we emphasize, above all others, the economic issues
in this society. Because there is no possibility for black people making
progress if we emphasize only race. [We must emphasize the fact that the civil
rights problem is at heart an economic problem.] You can psychoanalyze every
white person in the United States until he comes out pristine pure tomorrow
morning, filled with love for black people—and that will not provide jobs for
blacks or build housing. That is a political task which we must face.


